The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Stowaway, by Alvin Heiner

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Stowaway

Author: Alvin Heiner

Release Date: October 30, 2009 [EBook #30361]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STOWAWAY ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









The Stowaway

By Alvin Heiner


 _He stole a ride to the Moon in search of
 glory, but found a far different destiny._


His eyes were a little feverish--as they had been of late--and his voice
held a continuous intensity--as though he were imparting a secret. "I've
got to get on that ship! I've got to, I tell you! And I'm going to make
it!"

Different members of the group regarded him variously, some with
amusement, some with contempt, others with frank curiosity.

"You're plain nuts, Joe. What do you want to go to the Moon for?"

"Sure, why you wanna go? What they got on the Moon we ain't got right
here?"

There was general laughter from the dozen or so who sat eating their
lunch in the shade of Building B. They all thought that was a pretty
good one. Good enough to repeat. "Sure, what they got on the Moon we
ain't got here?"

But Joe Spain wasn't in the mood for jokes. He burned with even greater
conviction and stood up as though to harangue the workers. "You wanta
know why I got to go to the Moon? Why I've got to get on that ship? Then
I'll tell you. It's 'cause I'm a little guy--that's why! Joe
Spain--working stiff--one of the great inarticulate masses."

More laughter. "Where'd you get those big words, Joey? Out of a book?
Come on--talk English!"

Joe Spain pointed to the huge, tubelike Building A, off across the
desert; the building you had to have two different passes and a written
permit to enter. The mystery building where even newspaper reporters
were barred. "It's only the big shots they let in there ain't it? Only
them that's got a drag or went to college or something. Us little guys
they tell go to blow--ain't that right?"

"Who the hell cares? Maybe it's a damn good place to stay away from.
Maybe it'll explode or something. Who wants to die and collect his
insurance?"

"I got to get on that ship when it blasts off because they can't push
the masses around! We got a right to be represented even if we got to
sneak in!"

"Me--I'll stay on the ground."

"And besides there's the glory! You guys are too stupid to see that but
it's there. The glory of being on the first rocket ship to the Moon. The
name of Joe Spain written down in the history books and said over by
people and school kids for thousands of years! Immortality! That's the
word!"

"Well, just forget about it, Joe, 'cause you ain't going."

Joe Spain's eyes burned brighter. "Joe Spain, coming down the ramp with
the big shots when it's all over. News cameras snapping! People asking
for interviews!"

"But you ain't going 'cause--"

Joe shouted the man down. "And another thing. Us little people are
entitled to a representative aboard that ship. We got a right to know
what's going on. How come there's nothing about it in the papers? Only
the big shots knowing about it and whispering among themselves? It's
because they're trying to snag it all and freeze us out!"

"You're crazy. It's for security reasons. It's all hush-hush so it won't
leak out like the atom bomb did. The big boys are being smart this
time."

"And you ain't getting on," the interrupted man repeated doggedly,
"because there ain't a way in God's world to _get_ on. With triple
security all around the building, just tell me a way to get in. Just
tell me one."

"I'm going to get on that ship," Joe Spain said. Then he clammed up
suddenly. Joe Spain wasn't stupid. He was a talker, but he knew when to
stop sounding off.

The men went back to work shifting the big aluminum barrels from trucks
into Building B. Carrying the wooden crates and the paper-wrapped
parcels up the ramps and to the side of the building facing the big
secret structure labeled A. They worked until five o'clock. Then they
filed out and got into the waiting trucks and were hauled back to town;
the boom town that had mushroomed up in the desert overnight and would
die with the same swiftness when the project was completed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Joe went straight to his rooming house, washed up, put on his good
clothes, and found a stool in a nearby restaurant. He ate a leisurely
supper, glancing now and again at the clock. When the clock read eight,
he went out into the neon-stained darkness and walked three blocks to
the Black Cat, one of the three night clubs the desert town boasted. He
went to the bar and ordered a drink. He downed it slowly, carefully,
after the manner of a man who wanted to stay sober.

A half-hour passed before a thin, nervous individual elbowed to the bar
and stood beside him. Joe said. "Hello, Nick. You been thinking it
over?"

"I need a drink."

"Sure, Nick. Then we'll go some place and talk." But Nick got rid of
five drinks while Joe protected his own glass from the barkeep. After a
while, Joe said, "I'm willing to up the price, Nick. Two thousand--cash.
All I got."

"Le's get out o' here," Nick mumbled.

They walked out of the town and into the desert, Nick stumbling now and
again, to be supported by the tense, sober Joe. "Two thousand, Nick. You
need the dough."

"Sure. Need the dough. But it wouldn't work. Couldn't get you into one
o' them barrels."

"You wouldn't have to. All I ask is that you come along in the morning
and seal me up in one. All you'll have to do is lock on the lid."

"How you know the barrels are going on the ship?"

"Never mind about that. I just know. I paid to find out."

"Okay--suppose you do get on the ship in a barrel. Maybe it'll be stored
in a hold somewhere. Maybe they wouldn't open it very soon. You'd die."

"I got a way to get out. One of them special torches. The little ones.
Aluminum isn't very strong. I can cut it like butter."

"It'd be hot. You'd burn yourself."

"Let me worry about that," Joe said fiercely. "You want the two grand or
not?"

Nick wanted the two thousand and he was against the wall for excuses.
Then he had a happy thought. "Barrels is air-tight. You'd smother.
Thing's im--impracac'l. We'll forget it."

"I won't smother. I'm taking my own oxygen. Enough to last me clear to
the Moon if it has to. Come on. Break down!"

"Okay. For two grand. Got to have the dough now though."

His heart singing, Joe Spain counted out two thousand in cash. When he'd
finished he had exactly nine dollars left. He was a pauper. But the
happiest pauper who ever bought with his whole fortune the thing he
craved most.

"You won't double-cross me now, will you? If you've got any ideas like
that--"

"I'll do like we said. Nick Sparks never went back on his word--never.
But how you going to stay hid when it's time to leave work?"

"Leave that to me. It'll be easy. They don't check Building B too close.
No double check 'cause it's over a mile from Building A--outside the
safety perimeter. I'll stay in tomorrow night and I'll put a little
chalk-mark on the barrel I'm in--right near the top rim. First thing you
do when you come to work the next morning is seal it and line it up with
the filled ones."

"Okay, but I gotta go home now. I got a head. I gotta get some sleep."

       *       *       *       *       *

"What's in the duffel bag?"

"Clean overalls--towel." Joe pulled the zipper down halfway. The guard
fingered the blue denim but didn't dig deeper to find the towel. He
checked Joe's badge number, made a note on his pad, and motioned to the
next worker. Joe let tight breath slowly out of his lungs as he walked
toward Building B. Getting past the guard was a load off his mind. He'd
expected to get by, but it was one of the calculated risks that could
have stopped him cold.

Once inside the building, he put the bag into his locker and went to
work. He labored briskly and carried more than his share of the load.
But now and again he stopped to look over at the outline of Building A,
limned hard against hot blazing sky. And each time it was with a sense
of heady exhilaration that he thought of his destiny--his hard-earned,
dearly bought destiny. To be among that select group who would first set
foot upon the surface of the Moon!

He had no worries about not being allowed to do so. Once he showed
himself--with the ship far out in space--they'd have to accept him. Not
graciously of course, but they'd have to admire his courage and
tenacity. They could not, in all humanity, deny him a share of the
victory.

The day wore on and as quitting time approached, he became more
tense--more alert. Five minutes before the whistle, he faded back into
the building and hurried to the lavatory. He went into the booth
furthest from the entrance and locked the door. Now there was nothing to
do but wait. Another of the calculated risks.

The whistle blew. Almost immediately, the sound of footsteps broke the
silence and the lavatory was filled with hurrying men. Their stay in the
room was short, however, as Joe had known it would be. Men leaving for
home do not dawdle on the premises.

The lavatory was empty again. A period of silence while Joe raised his
feet from the floor and braced them on the toilet seat. The entrance
door opened. A guard making the departure checkup.

Joe held his breath. If the guard came down the line and tried the door,
he was finished. But Joe had banked upon human nature. The guard
stopped. For a long moment there was no sound and Joe knew the man was
bending over to run his eyes down the line of toilets close to the
floor. In this manner he could see the floor of every booth. The guard
straightened, turned, walked out. The door closed. Silence. Joe's heart
swelled with gratitude. He grinned, looking forward with joy to the long
night ahead.

He found a spot over behind the barrels where the night watchman would
have to climb over a lot of equipment in order to find him. He made
himself comfortable, practically certain the guard would not do this. He
stretched out on the hard floor and recorded the passing of the hours by
the number of times the watchman went through.

And he was surprised at how fast the time passed. Finally, checking his
count carefully, he left his hiding place and tiptoed to the line of
lockers. He took the oxygen equipment from the duffel bag after which he
hid the bag and the clothing therein behind a wall flange in a far
corner. Then he climbed into the barrel at the front end of the packing
line. He checked the barrel with a small X, and jockeyed the lid into
place.

       *       *       *       *       *

Time passed. Nothing happened. He wondered, if he'd missed on the time
element. The men should certainly have come to work now. More than once
he was tempted to push the barrel lid aside and check the situation.
When footsteps sounded, close by, and the lid snapped firmly into place,
he was glad he hadn't done so. Good old Nick! When he got back from the
Moon, he'd see to it that Nick got credit for his courageous act.

Soon the barrel began to move. Joe felt it rise into the air and settle
with a thump. Then the motor of a truck roared and Joe knew where he was
going. Straight toward Building A and the Moon rocket. There was more
movement until finally the barrel was set down for what appeared to be
the last time. Joe put the nose-piece of the oxygen tube into place and
visualized himself safe and snug in a storage room of the rocket.

He closed his eyes and went peacefully to sleep.

He slept a long time, to be awakened by a crushing--a wrenching--that
all but drove his head down into his spine. The pain brought him sharply
alert. He knew instantly what had happened.

_Blast-off._

He braced himself against the sides of the barrel, and gritted his
teeth.

Soon it was better. Then no pressure at all. Only the fierce happiness
on his heart. He'd set a course and won through! He was on the way to
the Moon!

Joe let plenty of time elapse. He knew it was well over an hour later
when he unlimbered the torch to cut an escape-hole in the barrel. This,
he knew, would be tricky. He could easily burn himself. The heat would
be intense.

But it wasn't too bad. The aluminum cut quickly, and in a matter of
minutes he was standing beside his barrel. As he'd suspected, it was a
storage hold. The pitch-darkness did not bother him. He'd come prepared
with a small pencil flash that threw an adequate beam.

He found the door, opened it and went out into a long passageway....

       *       *       *       *       *

Now he'd covered the length and breadth of the ship. He'd found a lot of
rooms--all in pitch-darkness. No observation ports.

_And no living thing._

He stood frozen in one of the rooms while the beam of his flash picked
out a code stenciled on a steel plate over some piece of machinery.
X59-306MY--Experimental--Explosion Rocket--Moon.

The flash dropped from Joe Spain's fingers. He stood in the
pitch-darkness while the jets vibrated through the rocket.

But there was no fear in him. Only the great pain of futility. Only his
tears, and his whispered words:

"They'll never know. Nobody won't ever know!"


THE END




Transcriber's Note:

    This etext was produced from _If Worlds of Science Fiction_ March
    1952. Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that the U.S.
    copyright on this publication was renewed. Minor spelling and
    typographical errors have been corrected without note.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Stowaway, by Alvin Heiner

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STOWAWAY ***

***** This file should be named 30361.txt or 30361.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/3/6/30361/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
